I'm Todd Fernandez,
the Automation Tools Manager,
and I'm the lucky guy that gets
to work with the talented men
and women of the AppleScript and
Automator engineering teams.
So by way of introduction,
I've been racking my brain.
I know that many of you may be new to
WWDC and new to AppleScript Studio.
And I've been trying to think of
appropriate metaphors to explain to
you really what is AppleScript Studio.
Well, is AppleScript Studio simply
AppleScript going really fast?
All right, not so much.
Let me try again.
is AppleScript Studio AppleScript that's
spent a lot of time
in the gym pumping up?
No, not really.
Well, the way I like to think about
AppleScript Studio is as the link between
AppleScript and Automator and Cocoa.
So that if you know AppleScript--
who knows AppleScript?
And you want to create Automator Actions,
Cocoa applications,
or simply put a beautiful
Aqua interface on your existing scripts,
AppleScript Studio can be
a great place to start.
And I'm glad you're
here to make that start.
And you want to create Automator Actions,
Cocoa applications,
or simply put a beautiful
Aqua interface on your existing scripts,
AppleScript Studio can be a
Well, there are a number of technologies
and tools that really make
up AppleScript Studio.
First of which, of course,
is AppleScript, which is the language in
which you'll write your
AppleScript Studio applications.
Next is the AppleScript Kit framework,
which is really the link between
the AppleScript code you write
and the user interface elements
that it's going to control.
AppleScript Kit Framework
is what translates those
AppleScript calls that you make
into the appropriate Cocoa calls,
which is the next technology
making up AppleScript Studio.
When we talk about the tools,
we're using the same tools that you
use to create your Cocoa applications
using Objective-C or C++ or C or
whatever language you're using.
Interface Builder to layout and
design and build our user interface.
And in talking about Studio,
then to attach handlers to give behavior
to those user interface elements.
and also name them to make them easier
to refer to from your Studio code.
And we use Xcode,
our integrated development environment,
to edit and debug our scripts,
and view the dictionary for
AppleScript Kit and any scriptable
applications that you want to
control from your Studio application.
So I've already covered
some of the common uses,
but why would you choose
AppleScript Studio?
Well, AppleScript's a really
high-level scripting language,
and that, along with its automatic
memory management,
make it really great
for rapid prototyping.
You can do a lot with
just a little bit of code.
And moving on from a prototype,
AppleScript Studio works really
well with other supported languages.
And in fact, we'll see that a bit later.
So it makes it easy for you to
prototype using AppleScript Studio,
and then decide over time to
re-implement parts of your
application using Objective-C,
for example.
And again, there are a number of uses
that we've seen developers
use AppleScript Studio for.
For sysadmins to take their
Unix tools and scripts and put
a nice user interface on them,
and do the same for any
existing AppleScripts.
To build an application that may control
one or more scriptable applications.
And of course,
to create automator actions.
I'm not going to talk any
more about automator actions,
but hopefully those of you
interested in that came to one or
more of the sessions yesterday.
So this is a hands-on session,
and I've provided you with session
materials for each of the three
sample projects we'll build today,
including milestones for each
step that we'll complete,
a detailed outline that covers
every step we'll follow,
including all of the source necessary,
and finally,
text clippings with all the source
that you'll need so you can easily
drag the source into Xcode as we build.
And you have a couple of options.
You can build the application with me,
which I certainly hope you'll do.
You can simply open up the milestone that
I'm working on up here and follow along.
Or you can just watch and experiment
later with the sample projects.
But again, I hope you decide to go ahead
and build along with me,
which will make this a
hands-in-the-air session.
So I'll be checking in with you regularly
to make sure that I'm not going too fast.
So please raise your
hand if you're with me,
if you see what I have on
my screen on your screen.
And we'll do this together.
So what are we going
to do together today?
Well, you may have heard of these books
that will get you from your couch
to running a marathon in six months.
Well,
we obviously don't have six months today.
So I thought we'd do "Couch to
Studio Developer in 60 Minutes." Now,
I know what you're thinking.
But don't worry.
I have a training plan.
First, we're going to walk.
And then we'll run.
That's it.
That's my training plan.
Wait, I want to make sure you got this.
So first we're going to walk,
and then we'll run.
So what do I mean by that?
Well, of course, walking, hello world.
But I think I've got something that'll
be a little bit more interesting than
your average run-of-the-mill hello world.
And then we'll run.
We'll create a complete Cocoa application
using AppleScript Studio.
Now, I think I know what's
in some of your minds.
Some of you more experienced
studio developers,
or those of you already
in good studio shape,
are thinking I may be
in the wrong session.
There's not really anything here for me.
I don't think so.
Because once we can run,
and those fast learners among
you can then join those in
good studio shape already,
we're going to pole vault.
We're going to use AppleScript Studio to
add some functionality to an
existing Objective-C application,
in fact, TextEdit.
So I think there's
something here for everyone.
So let's get started running.
And our first project is Hello World.
We're going to get you
off the couch right now.
I know it's late in the week,
and I'm almost certain I'm
more tired than any one of you.
So we can do this together.
We're going to start crawling.
Don't worry.
We're going to start by creating
a new Studio application.
We're going to add a
button to the main window,
which when clicking,
will get our Hello World,
and implement that behavior and
build and run our application.
So please switch to the demo machine,
and we'll get started.
[Transcript missing]
Just enough for a water break.
All right, so to get started,
we need Xcode.
So you can find that in Developer,
Applications.
And you can double-click
it to launch Xcode.
And while you're there,
you might want to launch
Interface Builder 2,
because we're going to need that.
So coming back into Xcode,
the place you want to start
is its new project assistant,
which you can get to from the File menu,
New Project.
And let me zoom in here.
So you can see the application projects.
And I know I made the same joke
yesterday in the Automator session,
but the Studio projects are right there
near the top two where they belong.
So everybody see this on their screen?
You see the new project assistant?
OK, a smattering of hands.
So let me zoom back out.
And let's do that a couple times.
That's fun.
So there are three
different Studio templates.
The AppleScript application template,
which is what we're
going to build right now.
But there are also an
AppleScript document-based application,
which gives you some additional
behaviors for an application
that has multiple documents,
like TextEdit.
And a droplet,
which is an application that is run by
dragging some files in Finder onto it,
that it will then do something with.
But again, we're going to create an
AppleScript application.
So I select that template and click Next.
And I'm going to call my project Hello.
And a note here, I would advise you,
if you are following along,
to please name things as I do,
because then you'll see exactly
what you're building on my screen.
And also, if you're using the milestones,
everything will work correctly.
And I'm going to put my
project in documents.
And once I've named my
project and chosen a location,
I'm going to click Finish to actually
create the project from the template.
So let's give ourselves a
bit more room to work with.
And let me give you a brief tour
of an AppleScript Studio project.
We have one or more scripts
in the scripts group.
In this case, you get a single script
named after your application.
And we'll get back to that in a moment.
In resources,
we have a couple of interesting things.
One is the AppleScript Kit dictionary,
which I will show you later.
And the main menu.nib,
which is what defines our
application's user interface,
just as it does for any
other Cocoa application.
So let's go ahead and
double-click mainmenu.nib,
and what that's going to do is open
up the nib file in Interface Builder.
And hopefully you see
something like this.
So I'm going to close the menu bar,
because we don't need that for this demo.
And under Tools,
we're going to show the inspector.
Because we'll need that to interact
with our user interface elements.
So what were we building?
Oh yes, hello world.
We want to add a button to our window.
So this is the Interface Builder
palette from which we can get all
the user interface elements that
we want to add to our application.
So I don't see any buttons here.
However,
I happen to know that this control
here is the controls with the buttons,
because it has a button on it.
It's funny how we do that.
So please grab the button from there,
just the standard button,
and drag it over somewhere
in the middle of your window.
And those of you ready for
something slightly more advanced,
if you hold down the Option key,
you get these handy guides so that
if you are extremely picky like me,
you can center your button.
Oh, and I can go the wrong way, too.
I feel so much happier now.
And if you double-click the button label,
we can rename the button Hello.
And hit Return to exit Edit Mode.
Great.
We've got our button in our window.
When we click it,
it's going to say something.
Well, OK.
Well, we need to add that behavior, too.
So while we've got the
Hello button selected,
Let's look over at the inspector,
and we see that it says
NSButtonInspector so that we
know that we've got our button.
And there are a number of different
panes of the inspector that allow
us to inspect and modify different
attributes of our user interface element.
So what we want to do is come
down to the AppleScript pane.
This is the
AppleScript Studio pane in reality.
And here, we can name our objects
and attach handlers,
which are really just
functions or methods.
You use the name of your choice,
but in Studio,
we typically call them handlers.
And there are a number of suites
of different handlers dealing
with different aspects of the
particular user interface element.
But this is a button,
and we're not getting too fancy yet.
We're still crawling or walking,
as the case may be.
So right now, all we need to do is click
on the clicked handler.
And those of you paying close
attention will notice that down
here in the main window of my nib,
I got this AppleScript info object.
That object is what keeps track of all
the names and Studio relationships.
So that you don't-- you want
to take very good care of that.
If you delete that,
you'll lose all of the names
and connections from your
user interface elements.
So coming back to the inspector,
we've attached this
handler to the object,
but we also need to attach it to a
script where we're going to implement
the behavior that we want to happen
when the user clicks that button.
So what we need to do is
click on a script down here,
and we'll put it in
our hello.AppleScript.
Those of you using an older version of
Xcode may notice that that doesn't look
like a radio button on your screen.
It looks like a checkbox.
Well, you have me to thank for that,
that now it looks like a radio button.
Thank you.
because it is a radio button.
All right, now let's save our nib.
And we can do that from File, Save,
or Command-S,
for those of you who prefer the keyboard.
I know you're out there, Dvorak or not.
Yeah, I know.
He gets an applause every time,
and I didn't get one here.
But I am not typing Dvorak,
I have to confess.
I don't want to take cheap applause.
Well, OK, I will if you really want to.
So now that we've saved our nib,
what I'm going to do is
click the Edit button,
which is going to transfer us back
into Xcode and insert a template
for the clicked handler that we've
just attached in our script so
that we can easily implement it.
So let's go ahead and
click the Edit button.
And we see we're back in Xcode,
and we've now got the onClicked template.
So I'm going to just hit
Return to get rid of that
is a great comment.
That's what it was,
because we won't need that anymore.
And let's see,
what do we want to have happen
when the button is clicked?
We want to say hello world.
So AppleScript has a scripting
edition called DisplayDialog.
Well, you know what?
That's kind of boring.
You can do that in any hello world.
This is AppleScript.
As I mentioned before,
high-level scripting language that
gives you the power of the OS,
the power of Mac OS X with
just a few keystrokes.
Let's do something a little bit more fun.
Say hello.
Well, you know what?
I think we can do better
than just Hello World,
too.
I happen to know that
next door is session 524,
something about XSAN.
I'm sure it's a great session,
but let's see if we can
get their attention.
Let's say hello session 524.
Now,
to get the nice formatting in our script,
we can compile the script.
And we can do that from the Build menu.
Or again, there's a keyboard shortcut,
Command-K.
And that gives us our formatting.
Let's go ahead and save our script.
So in order to have the proper effect,
of course, I hope there are some
of you building along.
Or you can open up the Step 1 milestone.
We need to do this in unison.
So I'll count down.
We'll do this on three.
And in fact, we need to build and run
our application first,
don't we?
So to build and run your application,
we're going to click the Build and
Go button in the toolbar,
which will compile our script
and launch our application.
So does everybody have their
Hello World program up with their button?
Let's get our cursor over the button,
and I'll count down.
On three.
One.
Two.
Two and a half.
Stay with me here.
Three.
Four.
It's that kind of teamwork
that makes this thing great.
You know what?
Thank you.
I'll applaud you.
Great, so that was Hello World.
But we can do a little
bit more with that.
So click the Stop button back in Xcode,
or you can simply select Quit from
your application menu of Hello.
Let's do something a little different.
Let's go ahead and use Display Dialog.
And again, I'm sorry,
I should have mentioned this before,
but in your Hello Studio milestones,
you'll find text clippings,
which if you get up,
you'll be able to just simply
drag the code into Xcode.
So if you grab and drag the step
one clicked handler text clipping
into your clicked handler,
that has all the code I'm
going to show you right now.
So I'm going to go ahead and live
dangerously and try to type it,
though, and see how successful I am.
So Display Dialogs in
AppleScript Scripting Edition,
that will put up a simple dialogue
with the text that you pass into it.
So let's try current time colon space,
close quotes, ampersand,
which allows us to concatenate strings.
And let's use another scripting addition,
do shell script,
which takes a string and will
actually execute that using the shell.
So we were not going to get too fancy.
We'll just do shell script date.
And again, we can compile that.
And save our script.
And again,
you can simply drag in the step one,
click handler text clipping if you wish,
and uncomment that line.
And when you've got that ready,
you can hit build and go.
Let's launch our second
version of Hello World.
And whenever you're ready,
click the button,
and you'll see we get a nice
dialogue with the current date.
Now, that's not terribly exciting,
except for those
sysadmins in the audience.
The light bulb should be going on that
you can take any script you want and
use something similar to that to put
a nice user interface on top of it.
So hopefully you're already
thinking of the many uses you can--
make of this.
So let's go ahead and cancel or click
OK and quit our application again.
And let's take this-- do one more thing.
We talked about using Studio to
control other applications and
build that into our application.
So let's do "Hello World" one more way.
Let's tell application-- well,
you can actually shortcut
tell app text edit.
new line and make new document,
which just simply tells TextEdit
to create a new document.
And set the content-- I'm sorry,
it set the text of the front
document to hello world.
And set the content-- I'm sorry,
it set the text of the front
document to hello world.
And then type end.
And if you compile, TextEdit will launch.
And you'll get the nice formatting.
It'll expand application.
It'll add the tell to the end.
This is a point to mention
that AppleScript has this nice
feature of doing tell blocks.
You can address many commands
without having to do tell
application foo repeatedly.
So let's go ahead and save our script,
and go ahead and build and go again.
And now when you click the Hello button,
You should get a new document
and text edit that says,
"Hello, world." So again,
this shows you just a very simple
example of how you can quickly
build an application that controls
other scriptable applications.
All right, can we go back to slides,
please?
Slides, please.
Thank you.
So what have we learned already?
We've learned how to create a
new AppleScript application.
We've added behavior to the
user interface elements,
a button in this case.
And we know how to build
and test our application.
So we're not on our knees anymore.
We're walking.
In week two, we're feeling a little bit
better about being off our couch.
Let's get a little fancier.
We're going to add some more
user interface elements,
a text field.
We're going to name our interface
elements and learn how to write
code that addresses them by name.
We're going to update our click handler
to do something a little bit different,
and add a new handler to our text field,
again, to get some additional behavior.
And finally, I'm going to show you that
your Studio applications are
automatically scriptable,
and I'll show you how to use that as
a good testing and debugging tool,
and can also help you to explore
other Studio applications
you might be working with.
So please, back to demo.
All right, so let's quit our-- quit
text edit and quit hello.
And let's open up our
main menu.nib again,
or simply switch back to Interface
Builder if you still had it open.
So what were we going to do?
We're going to add a
text field to our window.
So we're going to switch our palette.
And you can see this text view
here is the Cocoa Text Controls.
And we're just going to grab
a standard NSText field and
drag it over to our window.
There we go.
And we can double-click this,
just like the button,
and enter some default text.
And again, hit Return to exit edit mode.
And if you don't still have the
AppleScript pane open in your inspector,
please open to the AppleScript pane.
And I mentioned that we're going to
name our user interface elements.
So let's name our text field "Message."
And let's click on the button
and name the button Hello.
And one more important step,
because as I'll explain in a moment,
the elements work in a containment
hierarchy within a Studio application.
So let's click away, just on the window,
away from the button or the text field.
Or you can click on the window down
here in the main menu.nib window.
You'll see that gives us the
inspector for the NSWindow.
So let's name our window main.
Seems obvious, but stick with me.
All right, so what did we want to do?
We wanted to update our click handler
so something a little different happens
when the user clicks the button.
So let's switch back to Xcode.
If it's visible behind,
you can click there or
just click in the dock.
Let's erase the code for text edit.
And if you don't have the
text clippings up yet,
now would be a good time to get them up,
because we're going to drag the step
two clicked handler over to implement
The new version of RxClicked Handler.
Just one line of code.
Let me walk you through this.
So again, we're going to say--
And what we're going to do
is we're going to read the
content of text field message.
Again, message is the name we just gave
the text field in Interface Builder.
And which text field?
Well,
the text field that's in Window Main.
So text field message of Window Main.
It's just that easy.
You start with the window and work
backwards to get to the user interface
element that you want to access.
It could be nested eight levels deep
if you've got all sorts of table views
and text and boxes and what have you.
None of you would design a UI like that,
would you?
Good.
Actually, that was not the response
I was hoping for.
I'm a little concerned now.
Maybe we need a UI design
session tomorrow.
OK, well,
let's save the script and build and go.
Now we have the text field in our window,
and we've got the button.
But you've already
heard it say-- actually,
you haven't heard it say hello world.
So go ahead and click the button.
Wow, that's loud.
Let me try not to burst our eardrums.
And more interestingly,
if you type in something
else-- This is the test.
You'll see that the button,
when we click it,
it reads the value of the text
field and says it allowed.
I should have thought this
through a little bit more.
I'm glad to hear you
all having so much fun.
Excellent.
See, I knew you were going to love
training for the marathon.
Of course, we'll do yodeling later.
OK, so please quit hello again.
Let's do something a little
bit slightly more fancy.
Let's switch back to our nib file.
And that was fun,
but how about we update the
application so that when we
edit the text in the text field,
it sets the label of the button?
And actually, you know what?
Before we do that,
let's go back to Xcode.
Because I happen to know the answer,
but you may not know,
how do I refer to the
label of the button?
Is it called label?
Is it name?
What is it?
Well, in order to figure that out,
you can read the dictionary
for AppleScript Kit.
And to do that,
all you need to do is select
appleScriptkit.sdef in your project.
We provide it for you
there in the template.
And what are we-- buttons.
So all we need to do is type in button.
Hit return-- oh, actually,
we don't have-- and the easiest
way to find the button class,
which is what we're interested in,
is to then sort by kind.
And there it is right at the top.
And if we look down here,
we see all the properties for button,
as well as its inheritance hierarchy.
So the property specific to a button,
title.
That sounds promising.
So we actually want to set
the title of the button to
the content of the text field.
And I kind of snuck that by you before,
so let's look at text field, too,
while we're here.
Look at the text field class.
So as we notice here,
there's no content property here.
So how did that work?
Well,
objects in AppleScript Studio inherit
behavior from their superclasses.
And a text field is a control.
So we can see that, in fact,
every control has a content property.
So that's, in fact,
why the content of the text field works.
All right,
now let's go back to our nib file.
Now, after that little digression
about properties and dictionaries,
let's make our button wider.
Because I know you're going to
want to type in lots and lots
of text in your text field.
So you can do that just by
grabbing the resize indicators.
And let's resize our text field to match
and use the Aqua Guidelines to do so.
And let's see,
what we need to do is-- what
we want to happen is when the
user finishes editing the text,
we want to update the
title of the button.
So let's attach a new handler.
Strangely enough,
there's an editing suite.
So disclose that.
And let's attach the end editing.
So this handler will be called when the
user finishes editing in the text field,
leaves edit mode.
And again, that just attaches the handler
to the user interface element,
the text field.
We also need to attach it to our script.
And that's all we need
to do in the Nib file.
So let's again save.
And when we click the Edit button again,
we're going to switch back to
Xcode and get a new template
for the end editing handler.
So there is a text clipping for
the implementation of this handler,
step two, end editing handler.
But I'm feeling lucky.
So let's set the title of
button hello to the content.
And I've already made a mistake.
Again, we need to make sure we reference
the object using the full
hierarchy up to the window.
So it's button hello of window
main to the content of-- and here,
you might think that I'm going to copy
and paste the text field of window main.
But I don't need to do that in this case,
because as you see, each handler has an
argument passed into it,
the object.
How do you know which object that is,
do you ask?
It's the object that you
attach the handler to,
in this case, the text field.
So in fact, what I can do is the
content of the object.
So let's save that script.
Again, that should be the code that
you got with the text clipping,
otherwise I'm about to
be very disappointed.
And let's hit build and go to
build and run our application.
So we've got our wider
user interface elements.
And if we hit return in our text field,
you should see the button update.
This is really, really, really long.
Yes it is, and I won't torment you
any further with that.
But you're apparently
going to torment me.
I suppose I asked for that.
So there's one more-- boy,
you did take me literally when I said
name everything the way I name things.
Wow,
I didn't realize I had this much power.
What can I tell you to do next?
I won't exploit my apparent
control over the audience.
What I would like to show you, though,
is how you can use Script Editor to
script this application and
dynamically interact with it.
So please launch Script Editor,
which I have in my doc and which
you all should have in your doc,
too.
If you don't, you can find it in
applications/applescript.
And again,
there's a text clipping for this portion.
If you drag the Step 2
Hello Test Script text
clipping into Script Editor,
you'll get something like
what I'm about to do.
So we can do tell app hello,
our application.
What do we want to do?
Well, we might not remember what we
named the user interface elements,
so we could do something
like get every window.
And we need to remember
to end our tell block.
And I just compiled.
And let's go ahead and run.
And you should see that
there's one window,
window ID 1 of application hello.
Well, that's good, because we have one
window in our application.
But you may still be skeptical that
I'm actually talking to my application.
Let's get every control of every
window and go ahead and run that.
And we see the window has
a button and a text field.
Well, that sounds like our application,
but you still might be skeptical.
So let's get--
[Transcript missing]
of Window 1.
So I'll just do things in many different
ways as you can in AppleScript,
but Window 1 and
First Window are equivalent.
Let's go ahead and run that,
and we see that we get-- well,
you might not be able to see that.
Let's zoom in quickly.
That, in fact,
I get the title of the button.
And in fact, it's even better than that.
I can tell the button--
To perform action,
which will essentially tell the
user interface element to do
whatever it's supposed to do.
For a button, click.
So if I run that... This is really,
really, really long.
And in fact,
we can do this by using the name.
So button hello of window main.
This is really, really, really long.
DAVID J.
So you have your choice.
If you don't happen to know
what all the names are of a
particular Studio application,
you can simply explore.
Get every window, get every control,
get every button,
and address them by name, or not by name,
by position or ID.
If you built the application
yourself and you know that the
text field is named Message,
you can reference by name.
And this can be a great way to debug
your applications and test them out.
And in order so that you don't
think that the "this is really,
really, really long" is applying
to this sample project,
let's move back to slides.
So what have we learned?
And I hear some of you still
out on another training run.
We've learned how to use
Studio's containment hierarchy
to reference the user interface
elements in our application.
We learned how to read the
dictionary to learn how to reference
the user interface elements,
their properties,
and their relationships,
their inheritance.
We learned how to control
user interface elements to
get them to interact together,
to have the text field influence
the button and the button
read from the text field.
And we learned how to script the
application as a great way to
test and debug our application.
So now we're running.
It feels good.
We're feeling the burn.
Let's move on to something a
little bit more substantial.
We're ready for some
longer training runs.
And now we're going to build a complete
Studio application called Processes.
And this is the remainder
of our training schedule.
It looks like a lot,
but let's start at the beginning.
Let me show you the application
we're going to build.
It's a simple process
manager application,
roughly similar to Activity Monitor,
but it doesn't do everything
Activity Monitor does,
and it does some things that
Activity Monitor doesn't.
It uses a number of
AppleScript Studio features,
data representation,
we're going to have a table
view that has sortable columns,
we're going to have a toolbar.
We'll also have an idle handler to
refresh our view whenever the user,
however often the user wants.
And we'll also add drag and drop support.
All great features that you might want
to have in your particular application.
So let me show it to you.
And if you'd like to follow along,
you can look in your milestones.
Let me clean up here a bit.
Here we go.
If you find the processes
step 9 milestone,
that is the completed project,
And within it, there is a compiled binary
that's already built.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Please switch back to the demo machine.
fooled you there, didn't I?
Thank you for the assistance
from the peanut gallery.
So let's go ahead and launch processes.
Step nine,
this is the completed application.
And here it is.
So we see all the processes that
are currently running on my system.
And if I bring up Finder window
with some more applications,
you can see that I can drag
and drop more applications,
and it will go ahead and launch them.
Just kind of a bogus feature,
but we had to work drag and
drop support in somewhere.
And we can do multiple selections
and hide them and show them.
We can inspect them and get
nice properties windows.
And we can sort the columns.
We can configure our toolbar.
Just like any other Cocoa application.
So I'm sure that I've forgotten
to demo a great feature that the
engineer who actually built the sample
project spent long hours working on,
and I'm sure he'll tell
me about it afterwards.
Nevertheless, let's press on.
Back to slides, please.
So we're going to run.
We need to get some training runs in,
otherwise that marathon's
just not going to work.
But I know that you guys are
going to do your training runs
because you're a great audience.
Okay, yeah, I'm sucking up a little bit,
but... I know you're
out there practicing.
Now we're in month five.
We've skipped ahead a little bit,
in the interest of time.
And we're going to
jump--you guys are so great,
we're going to jump right to step eight.
We're going to add the idle handler,
and we're going to add
the drag-and-drop support.
But you do have all the other milestones,
so I encourage you to work through
them at your leisure later on.
So first,
we're going to add the idle handler.
And in order to do that,
we're going to attach the
handler to the application,
its files owner object,
which I'll show you.
We're going to attach a choose menu item
handler to the pop up button in the lower
left-hand corner of our user interface.
We'll build and run and test the
handler to make sure it works properly.
So what I'm going to do,
and what you should do,
is find the step seven
milestone for processes,
and we'll start building from there.
The milestones are numbered so that
they are the completion of that step.
So we'll pretend we did
steps one through seven.
Now we're going to move on to step eight.
So please, back to demo.
Let's see,
what kind of an opening should-- no,
I'm sorry.
I got distracted.
Let's see, I'm going to do what
I just asked you to do.
I'm going to open up the
Processes Step 7 project.
Let's give ourselves some more room.
And open up our editor by grabbing
the split feed down there.
I snuck that one by you before, too.
And what we wanted to do is
open up our main menu.nib.
Again, similarly to how we built
the Hello World application,
we're running,
but maybe we're not running
as much faster as we thought.
Or maybe we were running faster before.
Quite a conundrum.
Let's double-click the nib file and
open it up in Interface Builder.
You should have something
that looks like that.
Looks like the application
we demoed a short time ago.
And what we want to do
is add an idle handler.
And what we want to do is add that
handler to the files owner object,
which you can select down here
in the main menu.nib window.
And again, we'll switch over to the
AppleScript pane in the inspector.
We can see we already have a number of
handlers attached from the earlier steps.
And the idle handler is
under the application suite.
So we can just click it to attach
it to the files on our object.
And because we already have the launched
handler attached to the processes script,
we don't need to click that radio button.
I'm so glad it's a radio button now.
And let's see,
we need to do one more thing in the nib.
We need to select our pop-up button and
attach the Choose Menu Item handler,
which strangely enough,
is under the Menu Suite.
So that this handler, again,
will be called when the user clicks on
the pop-up button and makes a selection.
And finally, we need to attach that
to our processes script.
So let's go ahead and save your nib.
And click Edit to, again,
take us back into Xcode,
open up our script,
and add templates for those two
new handlers we've attached.
clear the comments.
For those of you, again,
not as familiar with AppleScript,
you'll note that a block comment can
be done with open paren asterisk and
then close with an asterisk close paren,
or a single line comment
with two hyphens.
I'll just sprinkle this stuff in.
Don't worry.
Let's open the script clippings
for the processes outline.
And we're in step eight.
And let's implement
the idle handler first.
Try dragging over that clipping.
And while we're there,
let's go ahead and bring over
the Choose Menu Item Code,
too.
And again,
you can compile with Command-K to
get the nice formatting
and make it easier to read.
And in the idle handler--
In this line, this is again very similar
to reading the title from our
button in our Hello Project,
we're going to read out the name of
the menu item that the user selected.
And if it's not update manually--
I guess I didn't actually
show you that pop-up before.
That's the feature that I'll
get talked to about later.
There's update every minute,
update every three minutes,
update every five minutes, and so on.
We'll read the value that the user chose.
And then if it's not update manually--
so if the user does want the data
to refresh every so long interval--
will call a method
called update processes.
And finally,
something important for an idle handler,
the return value is actually
the interval with which the idle
handler will execute in seconds.
So you might be wondering
where that's coming from.
The answer is we haven't
added it to the code yet.
So let's use the function pop-up,
which works just as well with
AppleScript as it does with any of the
other supported languages in Xcode.
And select the second property,
current process selection,
to take us to the top of the file.
And there's another text clipping,
Step 8 Property,
which we can just drag in there.
to define our idleVal property
and give it a default value,
here 60 seconds.
However, in the interest of time,
so that you can actually
see this working,
let's change that to five seconds.
Trust me, you'll be happy later.
And let's go back to our idle handler.
So we talked about that code.
Immediately beneath it, or if it's not,
you can again use the pop-up menu,
is our choose menu item handler.
And the first thing we're
going to do is verify that,
in fact, that was attached to the object,
which in this particular case is not
necessary because the pop-up menu
is the only object we've attached
to choose menu item handler to.
But as you get more user
interface elements in your script,
that becomes more important.
We're again going to read the name of
the pop-up that the pop-up's set to,
and then just simply have a
set of if-then-elses to set
the appropriate interval.
And again,
let's change update every minute to
set the idle vowel to five seconds,
again, in the interest of time so we
don't have to sit here and you
don't have to listen to my jokes,
which I'm sure you'd be
frightened of at this point.
All right, and those of you paying
close attention-- oh,
no, we do have update
processes in here already.
Great.
Let's save our script and build and go.
We should build and run
our processes application.
Here it is,
like we saw earlier in the demo.
And we're set to update manually,
so we're not updating.
Let's go ahead and set--
The update every minute.
And as we see, you may see, the
Status bar is firing every five seconds.
And in fact,
if we zoom out so you don't get--
is a great example of how
AppleScript Studio can help you to turn
a script into a full-fledged application.
Excellent.
I think we're going to finish
in a group in our marathon.
All right.
Let's go ahead and quit processes.
And back to slides, please.
So in just a few minutes,
you learned how to add an idle
handler to your application,
and also how to implement
a pop-up button.
Where did that hyphen come from?
Man, can't trust anybody anymore.
All right, so let's move on to our final
step of our processes project.
We're going to add drag and drop support,
that awesome feature which you'd
want in any process monitor
application of being able to drag
an application on to launch it.
So what you can do is,
if you've been building along with me,
you can continue with the
project we've been working on,
or you can simply open up
the step eight milestone,
which will get you right up to
the point where we're about to go.
To add drag and drop support,
what we're going to do is register
for the file names drag types,
because the only kinds of drags
we want to handle are files.
We want to add a drop handler to handle
the actual drop to the table view,
because we don't want
to support drops on,
say, the pop-up button.
We just want to support
drops on the table view.
And then we'll build and run and
verify that our application is now
accepting drops on its table view.
So please switch back to demo.
And since we're already in Xcode,
let's add the code first.
So please use the function pop-up to
switch to the Awake from Nib handler,
which at this point in our
training is fairly long.
But we want to go down to the end of it.
We can see that this else clause
is for the table view object,
which is where we want to
register the drag types.
So right before the final end if,
you can make some room and
bring up your clippings again.
And the step nine,
awake from nib clipping,
is what we need here.
Let me compile that.
So all we're doing is telling the object,
which in this case is the table view,
to register drag types file names,
because those are the only drag
types that we want to handle.
And let's switch back to our nib file,
mainmenu.nib.
And what we want to do is attach
a handler to the table view,
so I've clicked on the table view.
But those of you paying close attention
will notice that my inspector says,
I've got a scroll view.
How can this be?
Well, this is a handy thing that
you need to be aware of.
The table view is
embedded in a scroll view.
So in fact, I need to double click.
And you can see the highlighting
is different in the window itself,
and my inspector says I've
got the table view now.
Excellent.
So what we want to do
is add a drop handler.
Can anyone guess where
the drop handler is?
Which suite?
Thank you.
Not a plant.
Let's go ahead and
click the drop handler.
And as we can see, we've already attached
handlers to this object,
so we don't need to set the script again.
It's already set.
Save our nib.
And let's go ahead and click the
Edit button again to switch back to our
script and get our drop handler template.
Remove our comment.
And the final text
clipping for this project,
step nine, drop handler.
You can drag right in there.
Again,
we can compile to get the formatting.
And let me walk you
quickly through this code.
So one of the important things about
a drop handler is that the return
value from it tells the application
whether the drag was successful or not.
So did we drag something
that wasn't a file,
say a folder?
Because if we drag
something that's not a file,
we want to get the nice animation
of the folder being rejected,
because otherwise it might try again.
But if we do get file names dropped,
we don't want that animation.
We want it to look nice,
like the drop succeeded, which, in fact,
it has.
So in order to do get that behavior,
we need to return true or false,
depending on whether
the drag was successful.
So I define and initialize my
drag succeeded variable here.
I read the types that are on
the pasteboard and check to see
if there are any objects on the
pasteboard of type file names.
If so, I read them from the pasteboard
And if I have any, then I'm just going to
repeat through them,
check their kind.
If they're an application,
I'm going to launch them.
And say that I found an app in this drop.
If that's the case,
then we're going to go ahead
and update the processes list,
our table view,
so that we refresh and show the
new application that just launched.
And finally, set our drag succeeded
variable-- variable,
not valuable.
It is a valuable variable, though.
Say that five times fast.
meaning that our drop was successful.
And finally, we'll return that variable.
So if we didn't have any applications,
we'll return false,
which is what I initialized it to at
the beginning of the drop handler.
So we'll save that and go
ahead and hit Build and Go.
Here's our application again.
So let's go ahead and bring up Finder
again and drag some applications onto it.
And they launch.
Great.
But those of you who want to
write great applications know
you need to do negative testing,
too.
So let's try dragging a folder on there.
didn't like it, and if you saw,
I don't think there's a way
for me to slow this down,
but I do get the animation
of the drag being rejected,
which hopefully you see in your
versions of the application.
What happens when you
drag a folder and a file,
you ask?
I'll leave that to you.
Excellent.
Back to slides, please.
All right, so what have we learned?
We just learned how to add drag
and drop support to a table view,
which again, can be very useful in many
types of applications.
And we've completed our first marathon.
Congratulations.
But it seems to me there was
something else that we were going
to do once we learned to run.
So let's pole vault.
Let's do something a little trickier,
because just running, that's great.
But marathons are passe now.
We're well beyond that.
We've got a new training schedule.
We're going to write TextEdit.
OK, not really.
I'm going to demo TextEdit Plus,
and then I'll show you how to add the new
behavior to it that we're going to do.
So what new behavior are we going to add?
Well,
I actually want to do a survey here.
How many of you know that TextEdit
has a document properties inspector?
That's what I thought.
Oh, I'm sorry.
There is one hand back there.
Congratulations.
Well, we're going to enhance the
feature you didn't know exists.
We're going to add some additional
document properties using
AppleScript Studio to text edit.
We're going to add counts for characters,
words, and paragraphs,
which can be very useful if you need
to get that story in on deadline.
It's got to be 500 words.
So let me demo the product and show
you that mysterious document properties
inspector that you've never seen before.
Back to demo, please.
Let me clean up a bit.
I don't think we have time
for a game of chess today.
And in fact, what you want to do is run
the version of TextEdit.
And if you have the
normal TextEdit running,
you might want to quit
it to avoid confusion.
I know you can keep track of two
different copies of the same application,
but humor me.
From TextEdit plus step two,
choose TextEdit and launch it,
if you want to take a look with me.
And let's get an interesting
document in there.
So you can open up any of the
outlines from any of the milestones.
They each have an RTF outline.
Wow, that's some performance.
And I know you've been dying to know,
where is that document properties,
Inspector?
Well, it's under the File menu,
Show Properties.
As we can see down here at the bottom,
we've got this new statistics pane.
Of course, it's not new to any of you
who've never seen this before,
but the normal text edit
doesn't have that there.
Believe me.
You can check it out later yourself.
And if we remove a bunch of text from
this file and click the Update button,
we'll see that the numbers change.
So great, that's what we're going to do.
We're going to add this
bottom statistics box to the
Text Edit's document inspector.
Go ahead and quit Text Edit.
And back to slides, please.
So the first step to do this
is to prepare the project.
There are a few housekeeping
items that you need to do on your
Cocoa project to enable it to
work with AppleScript Studio code.
So that's what we're going to do first.
What we're going to do is add a new
AppleScript text file to hold our script.
And then we need to add a new
build phase to our project's
target so that that script is
compiled when we build our project.
And of course, we need to add that
file to the build phase.
Finally,
in order for Studio to work within
this scriptable application,
we need to make a few minor
changes to its scripting
dictionary to tie things together.
So let me show you how to do that.
Demo, please.
Thank you.
So in this case,
what you want to do is open up the
TextEdit Plus Starter project in the
.xcode project in that milestone project.
Let's give ourselves some room again.
And what we want to do is just click
anywhere there in the TextEdit group
over here where the source files are.
And we're going to use the Xcode--
we used the new project assistant
in the first hands-on project.
In this one,
we're going to use the new file assistant
to add our new AppleScript file.
So here it is, a file, new file.
And there are two different types
of AppleScript script files.
We're going to create a
new AppleScript text file.
Again,
right there at the top where they belong.
And let's name this-- again,
humor me here-- testAS,
with the AS in caps, .AppleScript.
Everyone see that?
All right, I just wanted to zoom again.
And click Finish to add the
new script file to our project.
Here it is in the Groups and Files pane.
All right, well, now we've added the
script to our project,
we need to make sure it gets
compiled when we build our project.
So let's go down to
Targets and disclose that,
and select our TextEdit target.
If we go up to the Project menu,
we want to add a new build phase.
There are several choices.
What we want to do is select
New Compile AppleScripts Build Phase,
which, strangely enough,
will compile AppleScripts.
So select that.
And you can just close the
Inspector pane that comes up.
Now that we have our build phase,
you can disclose the text
edit target so you can see it.
We've got this compile
AppleScript build phase down here.
Grab your text--the new
testas.applescript file and drag
it down so that bar appears beneath
"compile AppleScripts" and drop.
And you should see a 1 appear next to
"compile AppleScripts," and you can
tell if you've done it correctly if you
click on "compile AppleScripts" and you
just see "testas.applescript" up there.
Hopefully that's what everyone sees now.
Excellent.
So the last step to prepare our project
is to click on the Resources group.
And we're going to select
the TextEdit.ScriptSuite,
which defines TextEdit's
scripting dictionary.
And we need to make three modifications
here to tie AppleScript Studio in
and AppleScript Kit more accurately.
So what we need to do is
change the superclass of the
NSApplication and document classes.
And there are text
clippings for this as well.
You can see that this is
NSCoreSuite.nsApplication.
We need to change that to an
AppleScriptKit version of NSApplication.
And we've got
step1.nsApplicationSuperclass.
So we change it to
ASKApplicationSuite.nsApplication.
And similarly for the Document class
and the TextStorageType.
Again, we're going to be changing--
replacing these with their
AppleScript Studio equivalents.
So for the Document superclass,
we're gonna drag Step 1,
Document superclass.
There it is.
And for text storage type,
we're going to drag that
to text storage type.
Again,
replacing the NS core suite with the
appropriate AppleScript kit suite.
And save our changes.
Now, what I would suggest you
do is build your project.
But we're not going to build and go,
because none of these changes that we've
just done actually change anything yet.
But it will take a moment
for TextEdit to build.
So while that's happening,
back to slides, please.
Now, what I would suggest you
do is build your project.
But we're not going to build and go,
because none of these
So the next step, of course,
is to add that additional functionality.
We're going to implement the new document
properties that we talked about earlier.
So we're going to add an open
handler to the window so that when
the user selects that mysterious
feature that no one knows about,
the panel will open and the
properties will be updated.
And also,
we had an update button in there
so that the user can dynamically
click that button and update the
properties whenever they like.
So we need to add a clicked handler,
just like we did in Hello Studio.
We need to implement those
handlers and finally build and
run and test our application.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Back to demo, please.
So what we need to do is open the nib
file that contains that properties panel,
and we can find it in
the interfaces group.
There it is right at the top,
documentproperties.nib.
You can again double-click on that
to open it up in Interface Builder.
Let's arrange the windows
so we can see them all.
As we can see, we've already laid out
the statistics area,
so we don't all have to do a lot of
dragging and clicking to get all those
text fields lined up correctly and named.
And what we need to do is add a
clicked handler to the Update button.
Again, we'll need to switch back
to the AppleScript pane.
I've clicked on my button,
and now I'm inspecting it.
I can see it's the NSButton inspector.
And just like in the first
Studio application you
may have ever written,
we're going to attach the clicked
handler and attach it to our script.
The other thing we need to do is
attach the open handler to our window.
So again, we can click on the background
or click here in the panel.
And if I can remember
where this is-- yes,
there it is, in the Windows suite,
the open handler.
And again, we've already got a handler
attached to the script.
It's already selected.
So those are the only nib
changes we need to make.
Let's go ahead and save our nib.
And once more,
click the Edit button to take us back to
Xcode and give us our handler templates.
We'll remove the comments and
go back to our text clippings.
As we see,
we've got a step two clicked handler.
Let's go ahead and drag that in.
And an open handler,
and let's drag that in.
And go ahead and compile
to get the formatting,
or you can just save,
which will also compile.
Let me walk you through this code.
So the open handler is attached to
the window so that we know that the
object in this case is the window.
And we want to tell the window
to clear the contents of each
text field for our accounts.
And then we're going to call
a handler to actually populate
the text fields of that window.
Again,
this handler will be called when the
properties window is opened by the user.
When the user clicks the button,
we want to get the window of the object.
And this is, again,
another property that you could
look up in the dictionary that
controls have a window property.
So we can get the window of the button.
And then let's show you
another feature of AppleScript,
that you have exception handling.
So you can do a try block to
try populating the text fields.
And then if there's any kind of error,
you can do something.
In this case,
we're just going to log an error message.
And again, we're going to just populate
the text fields whenever
the user clicks that button.
So let's go ahead and build and go.
And if you haven't saved your script yet,
please do.
Oh, yes.
You know what?
I was already thinking about that.
Thank you.
That's not going to work too well.
We have one more text clipping.
Helpfully entitled, step two,
rest of code.
No wonder I forgot it.
It's just not memorable enough.
So let's go ahead and compile that.
So let's start with populate text fields.
We're first, again,
we're going to do this
within a try block.
We're going to tell the
progress indicator next to
the Update button to start.
And again,
it's the same containment hierarchy.
We've got the progress
indicator of the box.
Here's three levels now of the window.
We just tell it to start.
We're going to get the
account information by
calling this other handler,
which we have already added,
if you'll note,
but I'll show it to you in a moment.
And then we're going to set the contents
of the text field to those count values,
tell the progress indicator to stop.
That's it.
The Doc Count Handler actually
scripts TextEdit itself to get the
complete text from the front document,
and then calculate our character
word and paragraph quantities,
and then construct a record that
will pass back to the caller.
Excellent.
Well,
now I think we're ready to build and go.
I was just checking to see if
you were paying attention before.
So let's go ahead and open a
document that's got some text in it,
and open our properties.
Great.
Let's make sure it's
actually working dynamic.
And click on the Update button.
We see our progress
indicator briefly come on,
and the counts update.
Well, there you have it.
Back to slides, please.
So let me just sum up about everything
that we've learned today in walking,
running, and pole vaulting.
You've learned a lot
about AppleScript Kit.
We've worked with table views,
data sources, toolbars, idle handlers,
drag and drop support, buttons.
OK, well, yes, that was fairly obvious.
In Interface Builder,
we've built our user
interface in various forms.
We've built new ones.
We've updated existing nibs.
We've learned how to control the
different user interface elements.
We've attached lots of handlers
to the user interface elements to
give them interesting behaviors.
And within Xcode,
we've learned to create a new project,
add a new file to a project,
how to actually write
the code and compile.
And we've learned how to add additional
functionality to a Cocoa application
using AppleScript Studio.
[Transcript missing]
So again, the lab is immediately
following the session.
We'll be making our
way over there shortly.
If you have comments or
would like more information,
Sal Segoian,
who's been prompting me from the
audience whenever I forget something,
is our product manager.
I'm the engineering manager.
And we have a mailing list that you can
subscribe to and help each other out.
And we monitor it as well,
that Apple hosts.
And the conference website
has all the sample code.
If you didn't download it
and work through it today,
the references to the documentation,
and lots of other resources.